---
title: JRE Hell
author: Nicholas C. Zakas
permalink: /blog/2004/11/27/jre-hell/
categories:
  - Web Development
tags:
  - Firefox
  - Java
  - JRE
  - Programming
---
Few things have caused me more heartache and frustration while writing my book than the <acronym title="Java Runtime Environment">JRE</acronym> Java plugin. Just trying to get this plugin to work in both Internet Explorer and Mozilla at the same time is an exercise in patience and luck.

Since I&#8217;m trying to promote the best coding practices in my book, I&#8217;m using only the `<object/>` element to embed Java applets instead of `<applet/>`. Now, `<applet/>` works in all browsers, mind you, so I figured it would be easy to switch to the plugin. Big mistake.

I first go to Sun&#8217;s site and download the <acronym title="Java Runtime Environment">JRE</acronym>, since that installs the browser plugin automatically&#8230;or so I thought. I open up my example file in Internet Explorer, and I get a message saying that IE needs to download an ActiveX control. It then proceeds to download the <acronym title="Java Runtime Environment">JRE</acronym> (same version) again! Fine, so now I have two copies of <acronym title="Java Runtime Environment">JRE</acronym> 1.4.2 on my machine and IE is happy&#8230;but Firefox isn&#8217;t. It says I am missing a plugin for the page. So I click on the button to install, it says I need J2SE 5. Fine, so I download and install that, then restart Firefox&#8230;same message. Apparently, it&#8217;s just not going to work in Firefox.

This has been going on for the past hour and a half, and it&#8217;s certainly not helping me finish this chapter any faster. Oh look, the <acronym title="Java Runtime Environment">JRE</acronym> has finished installing after I uninstalled it, here we go again&#8230;
