---
title: Surviving an interview with me
author: Nicholas C. Zakas
permalink: /blog/2007/03/27/surviving-an-interview-with-me/
categories:
  - Professional
tags:
  - Interviews
---
I&#8217;ve been meaning to post this for a while, but it&#8217;s only now that I&#8217;ve finally decided to do it. So you&#8217;ve applied for a job and you see that I&#8217;m on the list of people interviewing you. You&#8217;re already a little nervous because, let&#8217;s face it, interviews are uncomfortable no matter what. I&#8217;m not a tough interviewer, but there are some things you really need to do when in a room with me to make sure I don&#8217;t write you off.

  * **Answer the question.** When I ask you a question, make sure you answer it. I&#8217;ve sat in too many interviews where I ask questions and the candidate talks around the topic but never actually answers the question. I know you&#8217;re nervous, and some blabbering is expected, but seriously, come back to the point. It&#8217;s not an opportunity for you to share a cute anecdote about your cat, I actually do want the answer. If you&#8217;re not sure what I&#8217;m asking for, ask me to clarify, I have no problem repeating questions or trying to ask them in a different way.
  * **Tell me what you don&#8217;t know.** If I ask you something that&#8217;s out of your realm of knowledge, say so. I don&#8217;t expect you to be an encyclopedia. Once I know that you don&#8217;t know how to answer, I can more fairly evaluate you. You won&#8217;t get to avoid the question, but I&#8217;ll give you hints to see if your problem-solving skills can take you the rest of the way.
  * **Don&#8217;t give up.** When in an interview with me, never give up. If you&#8217;re following my rules so far, you got a question you didn&#8217;t know how to answer and you told me so. But now, don&#8217;t give up! I&#8217;m giving you hints to get the correct answer; don&#8217;t stop me every step and say, &#8220;I really don&#8217;t know.&#8221; In our profession, you&#8217;ll be met with challenges that you don&#8217;t have an immediate solution for, will you give up then? I need to know you&#8217;re able to work through a problem and don&#8217;t get so frustrated that you just throw in the towel.
  * **Don&#8217;t assume trick questions.** Certain companies have created a culture of fear around interviews where they ask you off-the-wall riddles and trick questions. I don&#8217;t subscribe to that way of interviewing. All of my questions have answers, most of them have many different correct answers, and I promise that I will never ask you a trick question. It demeans you and it&#8217;s useless to me. Assume each question I ask has at least one correct answer.
  * **Back up your statements.** If you say something hinting at a solution or some knowledge you have, be prepared to discuss it. If I ask you a question and you say something like, &#8220;well, since IE doesn&#8217;t support CSS3&#8230;&#8221;, then you better be prepared to tell me what you&#8217;d do if IE did support CSS3.
  * **Don&#8217;t say you&#8217;re an expert.** This probably goes for most interviews, but especially with me. I never ask you to rank your skills on a scale of 1 to 10, so don&#8217;t offer that information to me. As soon as you put yourself into the &#8220;expert&#8221; category, I&#8217;m going to start you off with tougher questions. I&#8217;ve yet to meet someone who introduced themselves as an expert who actually was. Experts don&#8217;t need to tell you that they&#8217;re experts, they show you.
  * **Don&#8217;t try to impress me.** If I want to know something, I&#8217;ll ask. I know the information I need to get while in the interview, and any time I hear someone say, &#8220;want to see a neat trick?&#8221; or something of the same flavor, I start to tune out. Just answer what I ask as best you can.
  * **Be enthusiastic.** If you&#8217;re applying for a job working with me, make sure I want to work with you. The best way to do that is to be enthusiastic; show a willingness and eagerness to learn. Be able to talk about the product, the company, why this is the job you want. And pay close attention on that last one, I don&#8217;t want to hear about all the reasons your current job sucks. It&#8217;s certainly okay to explain the opportunities that you haven&#8217;t received in your current or past position, but present it as how you&#8217;re looking forward to growing and why this is the best place for you to do that.

Really, I do hope that anyone interviewing with me in the future will read this. I *want* you to do well when I interview you, I really, really do. Just avoid these common pitfalls and be yourself. Who knows, maybe we&#8217;ll end up working together sometime soon.

**P.S.** The <a title="My Yahoo!" rel="external" href="http://my.yahoo.com">My Yahoo!</a> team is hiring. If you&#8217;re a talented software engineer with a passion for innovation and for <a title="Yahoo!" rel="external" href="http://www.yahoo.com">Yahoo!</a> in general, <a title="Contact me" rel="internal" href="{{site.url}}/contact/">contact me</a> and let&#8217;s talk.
